---
title: Intermission - Galois
tag: category-theory-for-dbas
progress: 90% 
excerpt: |
    Mathematicians have the unfortunate tendency to see mathematics as something separate from the people who practise it. This may have something to do with a desire the keep mathematics pure and 'untainted' by the real world. A particularly egregious example of this is Galois. Anyone who reads his wikipedia article would assume he's famous for the life he lived, but instead he's well known for his mathematical work. Admittedly his mathematical work is the one thing more incredible than his story. I urge everyone who reads this to read his story and spread it to anyone with an interest in mathematics, or an interest in historical figures. That Galois may be the next blockbuster biopic.

---
{% include toc.md %}

## Galois

Mathematicians have the unfortunate tendency to see mathematics as something separate from the people who practise it. This may have something to do with a desire the keep mathematics pure and 'untainted' by the real world. A particularly egregious example of this is Galois. Anyone who reads his wikipedia article would assume he's famous for the life he lived, but instead he's well known for his mathematical work. Admittedly his mathematical work is the one thing more incredible than his story. I urge everyone who reads this to read his story and spread it to anyone with an interest in mathematics, or an interest in historical figures. That Galois may be the next blockbuster biopic.

While I can't pretend to be a historian, I'll do my best to give an overview of Galois' life and try to show how his life intersects that of many famous mathematicians at a time when many of the foundations for modern mathematics were taking form (it's nigh impossible to open a modern mathematical textbook without at least encountering one of the names in this article). 

Amongst mathematicians Galois is well known for laying the foundations for group theory, Galois theory (obviously) and using the two to show which polynomials can and cannot be solved and how[^solve], thereby solving a long list of old (literally ancient) mathematical problems. His work is so general that even now it shows up in seemingly unrelated areas like clustering data. This might seem to suggest he had a long and fruitful life in an influential position, but nothing is further from the truth.

In 1828 Galois applied to the École Polytechnique, but was rejected and entered the École normale supérieure instead (which has since become one of the most renowned mathematical institutes). As would happen more often this rejection was mostly due to Galois failing to explain his ideas clearly enough, or perhaps in a way that only the brightest mathematical minds of the time could understand.

A year later he did manage to get a paper published, but two papers on polynomial equations were rejected by none other than Cauchy [^cauchy]. Cauchy did however recognise the importance of these papers because he urged Galois to combine them and enter them in the competition for the Grand Prize in mathematics of the Academy of Sciences. Which Cauchy thought Galois would likely win.

He also attempted to enter the École Polytechnique again, a few days after a political dispute had driven his father to commit suicide. He didn't succeed this time around either. The exact reason is not quite clear, but the most plausible reason being that the examinator was completely baffled as an increasingly irate Galois made logical leaps that the examinator had no hope of following.

In late 1829 he completed his Baccalaureate at the École normale. A bit later he tried to enter the Grand Prize like Cauchy had suggested, by submitting his paper to the the secretary of the Academy of Science Fourier[^fourier]. Unfortunately it looks like Fourier died soon after receiving his submission, which has been lost. The competition was eventually won by Abel[^abel] (posthumously) and Jacobi[^jacobi]. Galois did publish a further 3 papers that year on Galois theory, finding the roots of polynomials and no number theory.

The year 1830 was also a turbulent period in French politics[^history]. A brief and likely wrong summary is that after the people overthrew the monarchy they were then overthrown by Napoleon, then Louis XVIII, Napoleon (briefly), then Louis XVIII again followed by Charles X. This lasted until July 1830 when Charles X lost the election[^monarchy]. This then started off *another* French revolution (clearly the French were intent on trying anything at least twice). 

The reason I mention this is because Galois wasn't just a bystander to this all. Or well he was at first, but not willingly. The director of the École normale had locked him in, which lasted until Galois wrote a furious letter to the Gazette des Écoles, which caused him to be expelled. So Galois quit and joined the Republican artillery unit of the National Guard, while still working on his mathematical theories.

This unit was later disbanded and several of its officers prosecuted for conspiring to overthrowing the government. At the banquet celebrating their acquittal Galois was also present (as well as other famous people like Dumas[^dumas]) and was seen toasting to Louis Philippe (successor of Charles X) while holding a dagger above his cup. This was considered a threat and he was arrested the day after, but was eventually acquitted (in part to a clever lawyer who claimed he hadn't said 'To Louis Philippe' while holding the dagger but rather 'To Louis-Philippe, if he betrays').

This didn't last however, as the following July the 14th Galois was arrested again, heavily armed, leading a protest. He continued working on mathematics from prison, where his inmates goaded him to drink alcohol for the first time. While drunk he supposedly said he would die in a duel because he would be asked upon to defend 'her' honour, and how nothing had yet replaced the loss of his father, after this he is said to have attempted suicide had his inmates not restrained him.

After his release from prison months later Galois participated in a duel for reasons that still remain unclear and lost his life, in May of 1832 a mere 3 years after first applying to the École Polytechnique, at the age of 20. His funeral ended in riots.

Galois left a stack of 60 or so pages containing many important ideas of mathematics with far reaching consequences[^liouville], and he left his brother Alfred the words "Ne pleure pas, Alfred! J'ai besoin de tout mon courage pour mourir à vingt ans!"[^translation]

--------------------------------------------------------------

[^solve]: Solving a polynomial here means writing a general formula for its roots. Consider for example how all quadratic equations can be solved with the abc-formula. Similar formulae exist for cubic and quartic equations, but Galois showed such a formula cannot exist for higher order polynomials.

[^cauchy]: Famous for his work in analysis, limits, and giving his name to dozens of wikipedia pages.

[^fourier]: Yes that one.

[^abel]: Did a lot of things closely related to the things Galois was working on, in fact he was the first to show some polynomials couldn't be solved, which Galois later improved upon by showing exactly which polynomials couldn't be solved. He also independently described group theory, groups with operations that are symmetric (such as 'i.e. such that $x + y = y + x$' are called abelian). The Abel prize (mathematical answer to the Nobel prize) is also named after him. He died young in 1829 at 26 of tuberculosis.

[^jacobi]: Hard to summarize his contributions, his name shows up all over the place. Quite a lot of his work turned out to be incredibly useful in both classical and quantum mechanics, although quantum mechanics wouldn't exist until a century later.

[^history]: Which I'm not remotely qualified to explain.

[^monarchy]: The fact that a royal lost power because of an election in a constitutional monarchy should give a clear idea how complicated these times were politically.

[^dumas]: Not known for his mathematical prowess. Considering his Three Musketeers is about four musketeers, I'm not sure he could count, unless you count Monte Cristo.

[^liouville]: After Liouville (yet another famous mathematician) read the papers in 1842 and recognized their importance, publishing them in 1846. It's a bit unclear what prompted Liouville to read the papers or he only did so 10 years after Galois' death.

[^translation]: Don't cry Alfred! I need all my courage to die 20 years old!